## Discussions

* Look at [plan](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/16z5WiGysXqssw5GFhP05LpfEnmoU-sBeT-HiZSGOzAA/edit#gid=669025093) with Jon Taylor
  * New plan to include new staff if possible
  * Check plan over with Jon Taylor
  
* Instrument Team Requirements
  * Imaging [sine2020](https://github.com/DanNixon/documents/blob/8f3abf8cbc951a23e1d3eeeec0285c039cded9ed/meeting_notes/June_2018_Italy/imaging_questions.md)
* Workspace2
* Hardware Requirements 
* Other Core Team Discussions
* How to continue MD Work? should have Dan Nixon involved for this

## Other Activities 

* ISIS Tour
* Meet ISIS Mantid Dev Team
* Meet ISIS IBEX Dev Team
